---
layout: home
comments: false
list_title: ' '
---

Hello friend, welcome to pwnthebox!

1. [List of all posts](/2020/11/22/list-of-all-posts.html)
2. [Reverse Engineering and Binary Exploitation series](/reverse/engineering/and/binary/exploitation/series/2019/03/25/reverse-engineering-and-binary-exploitation-series-mainpage.html): My attempt to introduce the reader to OS security, x86 assembly programming, ELF file format, Buffer-Overflow vulnerability, writing Shellcode, understanding ASLR-W^X-StackCanary, Return-to-Libc, ROP, SROP etc., Most of these posts are hands-on in nature. They involve writing sample vulnerable programs, understanding the problem, understanding a particular exploit method and constructing the exploit by hand.
3. [Personal projects](2021/07/18/personal-projects.html): Documentation of malware analysis, tools to understand certain concept better.
4. [Systems Security papers, summaries and posts](/2021/07/18/systems-security.html): Has some stuff I have done related to Systems security.
5. [Talks, workshops, CTFs](/2019/03/25/talks-and-workshops-mainpage.html)
5. [Exploring Rust](/rust/2020/10/11/rust-c-experiments.html): I have been using Rust from past an year. I am familiar with basic syntax, features and have fought a bit with the borrow-checker. I wanted to go a step forward to understand the code generated by Rust - what does its abstractions boil down to at the assembly level. Along with that, I wanted to understand Event Driven programming - have written a few posts about how it is done in C (select, poll, epoll) so far. Need to write about how it is done in Rust.
6. [Packet Overflow!](/packet/overflow/2019/03/25/packet-overflow-mainpage.html): An introduction to Computer Networks, packets, wireshark, network programming - hands-on style.
7. [Setting up a Blog using Jekyll](/blogging/2019/03/25/setting-up-a-blog-using-jekyll-mainpage.html): Steps to setup a simple Github Pages site like this one.
---------------------------------------------------
       
