---
title: Integral role of Simulation in Decision Making in the context of Physical Internet
categories: pi
comments: true
layout: post
---
                                                                                                                            - Adwaith Venkatesh Gautham
## Introduction

According to a recent estimate [1], number of people who have access to Digital Internet (DI) and who use it has crossed 5.5 billion people which is over 65% of global population. When you attempt to understand how DI works, you realize it to be a huge network of networks, each network owned by different companies of varied sizes, at time competitors, but behaving in a co-operative manner to make DI work. DI can be seen as a logistics network for Digital Packet (DP), which contains a small amount of data and is to be transported from a specific source machine to a specified destination machine. For someone who is fascinated with physical logistics and supply-chains, it would have occurred sometime on whether a DI-like logistics network is even possible for physical packages?! If it is possible, how would it be, what are the advantages and disadvantages compared to today’s established way of physical logistics and so on. These questions are great thought experiments and mathematical exercises at the least and highly game-changing at best. Fortunately, we are in a better position to think about these and answer a couple of them than we were a decade ago.

Physical Internet (PI) is a nascent yet ground-breaking concept that aims to revolutionize the field of logistics. It aims to build a sustainable, co-operative and a distributed logistics network for physical packages inspired by DI. Today’s physical logistics networks have several problems including multiple parallel logistics networks running across same geographies, severe under/over-utilization of resources, unavailability of logistics services in many regions and so on. Physical Internet is a promising logistics paradigm which aims to practically solve atleast some of these problems. It was formally proposed by Prof. Benoit Montreuil in 2011[2] in the form of a white paper where a general framework and concept was developed and directions for future work was proposed. There was a massive surge in PI research post that. In the last fifteen years, one has seen research in a variety of sub-fields in PI – PI general design, specific designs of PI hubs and warehouses, on business models, pricing and revenue models in PI, PI internals like routing, co-operation among Logistics Service Providers (LSPs) & everything related to transportation and route management, application of PI in specific real-life scenarios, technology and automation in PI and so on.

# Importance of Simulations in PI

Good portion of research work on PI is made possible because of simulations. PI is a relatively new paradigm and is in its concept-phase. Almost all concepts developed around PI are brought to life through simulations and experiments. But simulations in PI are not just about bringing concepts on paper to life but also to make critical evaluations, comparisons, analyses and finally making decisions. As we know, decisions are made at different levels and because PI is a new system, we need as much insights as possible at every level so that best decisions are made. In case of PI, it won’t be wrong if it is said that the digital-twin is already up and running and will guide decision-makers to help the physical-twin take birth, crawl, walk and finally run. In the rest of the article, we’ll see certain insights into how simulations help in decision making in two broad areas: Corporate Strategy & Policy, and Intermediate Strategy.

# Corporate Strategy and Policy

This will entail decision making at the corporate level and policy stakeholders like the government. Once PI gains a certain maturity and enough research and development happens around it, it moves from concept-phase to adoption-phase and most of the decisions will revolve around adoption to start with. While many Tier-2 and Tier-3 LSPs will be more than happy to be part of this distributed and co-operative logistics network (possibly due to purely financial reasons), the Tier-1 LSPs and government will do their due diligence. It is primarily through simulations that they are informed about PI, its business model, functionality, its advantages and disadvantages, practical use cases and places where PI can be adopted as pilot and so on.

One can see a wide variety of simulations on demonstrating functional PI in different use-cases – starting with understanding how PI might look like in reality [3]. One can find works of simulations in PI in specific conditions – could be region-specific which includes constraints and scenarios pertaining to specific regions ([4] describes simulator for a particular PI use-case in France), simulation models that describe operational details like design and functioning of PI Transportation Hubs [8], or how to make a bi-modal Road-Rail Physical Internet Hub work? [5], on ways for multiple LSPs to collaborate on a macro/global level [7], how inventory management might look in PI [9] to list a few. Another interesting class of simulations are those comparing PI with today’s established way of doing logistics, particularly revolving around sustainability, capacity utilization, fuel efficiency and relevant topics – using the simulator built in [4], a PI-based city-logistics framework was proposed in [6] and demonstrated through a small example that realizing PI would be beneficial for businesses (in terms of better delivery times, lower fuel costs) and sustainable (lower fuel consumption).

A good deal of work needs to be done in many areas particularly working business models for PI, realizing sustainability through PI, making logistics available even in the remotest of the areas and simulations are an excellent way to present these to decision-makers. This is how simulations are slowly presenting PI to top decision-makers of big LSP companies and policy stakeholders like the government – based on which different decisions can be made from adopting PI as pilot in certain areas to accelerating R&D in PI (which can be a significant amount of revenue/GDP for corporates/government respectively) to creating teams and organizational structures to make PI an active part of the company operations. In the past, a great deal of ground-breaking innovations from operations research in mid-20th century to electronic chips in 1970s, Internet in 1990s to AI in 21st century got accelerated and supported by policy stakeholders because they were/are deemed important. Among different methods, digital simulations clearly play a significant role in demonstrating PI to such decision-makers.

# Intermediate Strategy

A lot of decisions at the mid-level and regional level decide how PI would function. On how the physical packages flow in the network, routing and optimization, collaboration among different LSPs, disruption and delay management, capacity utilization and efficiency – these are areas which need a strategy as well as tactical decisions. To get an idea of it, an important area and decision-making related to it are discussed.

Routing is a primary decision to be made at a regional level. Decisions are to be made based on physical conditions and LSPs’ availability. In a new PI deployment, managers need to be able to visualize the choices, weight them and decide on routing strategy. A wide range of routing protocols from static and rigid ones suitable for highly predictable environments to dynamic protocols designed for unpredictable conditions. Several recent works [10][11] published highly dynamic protocols whose behaviour has been studied using experiments and simulations. Add to this the rich current literature and solutions on route optimization. Most of these protocols have been simulated using which decision support systems can be built for managers.

# Conclusion

Through this article, we got a glimpse of use of digital simulations in different levels of decision making in the context of Physical Internet. Simulations have been an excellent tool to demonstrate new concepts and have been helpful in decision-making to a certain extent specifically around PI-adoption and possible options available for operations given the phase it is in. As PI matures, simulations are poised to play an increasingly central role in decision-making across all organizational levels.

# References

1. “Number of Internet and Social Media users worldwide as of February 2025” A Statista report: https://www.statista.com/statistics/617136/digital-population-worldwide/
2. Towards a Physical Internet: Meeting the Global Logistics Sustainability Grand Challenge - https://numerique.banq.qc.ca/patrimoine/details/52327/2494032
3. Simulation of a Physical Internet-based Transportation Network: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258360274_Simulation_of_a_Physical_Internet-Based_Transportation_Network
4. Simulating a physical internet enabled mobility web: The case of mass distribution in France: https://hal.science/hal-00728584/
5. A Simulation-Optimization Approach for Two-Way Scheduling/Grouping in a Road-Rail Physical Internet Hub: https://www-sciencedirect-com.revproxy.escpeurope.eu/science/article/pii/S240589631931417X?via%3Dihub
6. Physical Internet enabled Hyperconnected City Logistics: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352146516000752
7. Routing the PI-Containers in the Physical Internet using the PI-BGP protocol: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330475333_Routing_the_Pi-Containers_in_the_Physical_Internet_using_the_PI-BGP_Protocol
8. Modelling and Simulation of a Physical Internet of Transportation Hubs: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050919304673
9. Inventory Control Models towards Physical Internet - Lateral Transshipment Policy Determination by Simulation: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332633133_Inventory_Control_Models_towards_Physical_Internet_Lateral_Transshipment_Policy_Determination_by_Simulation
10. A dynamic and reactive routing protocol for the physical internet network: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00207543.2023.2274340
11. A dynamic routing protocol with payments for the Physical Internet: A simulation with learning agents: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1366554522002824

